Tranio,
since for the great desireI had
to see fair Padua, nurseryof arts,
I am arrived for fruitfulLombardy, the pleasantgarden of great Italy;
and by my father's loveand leave am arm'd
with his good will and thygood company,
my trusty servant,well-approved in all,
here let us breathe andhaply institute
a course of learning andingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for gravecitizens
gave me my being and myfather first,
a merchant of greattraffic through the world,
Vincetino come ofBentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought upin Florence,
it shall become to serveall hopes conceived,
to deck his fortune withhis virtuous deeds.
And therefore, Tranio, forthe time I study,
virtue and that part ofphilosophy
will I apply that treatsof happiness by virtuespecially to be achieved.
Well, tell me thy mind,
for I have Pisa left andam to Padua come
as he that leaves ashallow plash to plungehim in the deep
and with satiety seeks toquench his thirst.
Mi perdonato, gentlemaster mine,
I am in all affected asyourself,
glad that you thus resolve
to suck the sweets ofsweet philosophy.
Only, good master, whilewe do admire
this virtue and this moraldiscipline,
let's be no stoics nor nostocks, I pray,
or so devote toAristotle's cheques
as Ovid be an outcastquite abjured.
Balk logic withacquaintance that you have
and practise rhetoric inyour common talk.
Music and poesy use toquicken you.
The mathematics andmetaphysics,
fall to them as you findyour stomach serves you.
No profit grows where isno pleasure ta'en.
In brief, sir, study whatyou most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, welldost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wertcome ashore,
we could at once put us inreadiness--
ow--
and take a lodging fit toentertain
such friends as time inPadua shall beget.
But stay a while.
What company is this?
Master, some show towelcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me nofarther,
for how I firmly amresolved you know;
that is, not bestow myyoungest daughter
before I have a husbandfor the elder.
If either of you both loveKatharina,
because I know you welland love you well,
leave shall you have tocourt her at your pleasure.
To cart her rather.
She's too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio,will you any wife?
I pray you, sir, is ityour will
to make a stale of meamongst these mates?
Mates, maid, how mean youthat?
No mates for you
unless you were ofgentler, milder mold.
I' faith, sir, you shallnever need to fear.
I wis it is not halfway toher heart,
but if it were, doubt nother care should be
to comb your noddle with athree-legg'd stool
and paint your face anduse you like a fool.
From all such devils, goodLord deliver us.
And me too, good Lord.
Hush, master.
Here's some good pastimetoward.
That wench is stark mad orwonderful froward.
But in the other's silence
do I see maid's mildbehavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio.
Gentlemen, that I may soonmake good what I have said--
Bianca, get you in,
and let it not displeasethee, good Bianca,
for I will love thee ne'erthe less, my girl.
A pretty peat.
It is best put finger inthe eye,
an she knew why.
Sister, content you in mydiscontent.
Sir, to your pleasurehumbly I subscribe.
My books and instrumentsshall be my company,
on them to look andpractise by myself.
Hark, Tranio, thou may'sthear Minerva speak.
Signior Baptista, will yoube so strange?
Sorry am I that our goodwill effects Bianca's grief.
Why will you mew her up,Signior Baptista,
for this fiend of hell,
and make her bear thepenance of her tongue?
Gentlemen, content ye.
I am resolved.
Go in, Bianca.
And for I know she takethmost delight
in music, instruments, andpoetry,
schoolmasters will I havewithin my house,
fit to instruct her youth.
If you, Hortensio, or,Signior Gremio, you,
know any such, prefer themhither,
for to cunning men I willbe very kind
and liberal to mine ownchildren in good bringing up.
And so farewell.
Katharina, you may stay,
for I have more to communewith Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may gotoo, may I not?
What?
Shall I be appointedhours?
As though, belike,
I knew not what to takeand what to leave?
Ooh.
Ha!
Oh.
Phew.
You may go to the devil'sdam.
Your gifts are so good,here's none will hold you.
Their love is not sogreat, Hortensio,
but we may blow our nailstogether
and fast it fairly out.
Our cakes dough on bothsides.
Farewell.
And yet for the love Ibear my sweet Bianca,
if I can by any meanslight on a fit man
to teach her that whereinshe delights,
I will wish him to herfather.
So will I, Signior Gremio,
but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of ourquarrel yet never brookedparle,
know now, upon advice,
it touches us both
that we may yet again haveaccess
to our fair mistress andbe happy rivals
in Bianco's love,
to labor and effect onething specially.
What's that, I pray?
Marry, sir, to get ahusband for her sister.
A husband? A devil.
I say a husband.
I say a devil.
Thinkest thou, Hortensio,though her father be very rich,
any man is so very a foolto be married to hell?
Tush, Gremio, though itpass your patience and mine
to endure her loudalarums,
why, man, there be goodfellows in the world,
an a man should light onthem,
would take her with allfaults, and money enough.
I cannot tell,
but I had as lief take herdowry with this condition
to be whipped at the highcross every morning.
Faith, as you say, there'ssmall choice in rotten apples,
but come;
since this bar in lawmakes us friends,
it shall be so far forthfriendly maintained
till by helping Baptista'seldest daughter to a husband
we set his youngest freefor a husband
and then have to't afresh, hmm?
Sweet Bianca.
Happy man be his dole.
He that runs fastest getsthe ring.
How say you, SigniorGremio?
I am agreed,
and would I had given himthe best horse in Padua
to begin his wooing
that would thoroughly wooher, wed her and bed her,
and rid the house of her.
Come on.
I pray, sir, tell me, isit possible
that love should of asudden take such hold?
Tranio, till I found it tobe true,
I never thought itpossible or likely;
But see, while idly Istood looking on,
I found the effect of lovein idleness
and now in plainness doconfess to thee,
that art to me as secretand as dear
as Anna to the queen ofCarthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, Iperish, Tranio,
if I achieve not thisyoung, modest girl.
Well, counsel me, Tranio,for I know thou canst.
Assist me, Tranio, for Iknow thou wilt.
Master, it is no time tochide you now.
Affection is not ratedfrom the heart.
If love have touch'd you,nought remains but so--
"Redime te captum quamqueas minimo."
Gramercies, lad, goforward; this contents:
the rest will comfort forthy counsel's sound.
Master, you look'd solongly on the maid,
perhaps you mark'd notwhat's the pith of all.
O yes, I saw sweet beautyin her face
such as the daughter ofAgenor had
that made great Jove tohumble him to her hand
when with his knees hekiss'd the Cretan strand.
Saw you no more?
Mark'd you not how hersister
began to scold and raiseup such a storm
that mortal ears mighthardly endure the din?
Tranio, I saw her corallips to move,
and with her breath, shedid perfume the air.
Sacred and sweet was all Isaw in her.
Nay, then, 'tis time tostir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir.
If you love the maid,
bend thoughts and wits toachieve her.
Thus it stands.
Her eldest sister is socursed and shrewd
that till the father ridhis hands of her,
Master, your love mustlive a maid at home.
Therefore has he closelymew'd her up,
because she will not beannoy'd with suitors.
Oh, Tranio, what a cruelfather's he.
But art thou not advised,
he took some care to gether cunning schoolmasters
to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir, andnow 'tis plotted.
I have it, Tranio.
Master, for my hand, bothour inventions meet andjump in one.
Well, tell me thine first.
You will be schoolmasterand undertake the teachingof the maid.
- That's your device. - Itis; may it be done?
Not possible, for whoshall bear your part,
and be in Padua hereVincentio's son,
keep house and ply hisbook, welcome his friends,
visit his countrymen andbanquet them?
Basta; content thee, for Ihave it full.
We have not yet been seenin any house,
nor can we liedistinguish'd by our facesfor man or master.
Then it follows thus,
thou shalt be master,Tranio, in my stead,
keep house and port andservants as I should.
I will some other be, someFlorentine,
some Neapolitan, or ameaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall beso.
Tranio, at once, uncasethee.
Take my color'd hat andcloak.
When Biondello comes, hewaits on thee,
but I will charm him firstto keep his tongue.
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith ityour pleasure is,
and I am tied to beobedient,
for so your father chargedme at our parting.
"Be serviceable to myson," quoth he,
although I think 'twas inanother sense.
I am content to beLucentio, because so wellI love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, becauseLucentio loves,
and let me be a slave toachieve that maid
whose sudden sight haththrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Sirrah, where have youbeen?
Where have I been?
Nay, how now. Where areyou?
Dear Master, has my fellowTranio stolen your clothes?
Or you stolen his?
Or both? Pray, what's thenews?
Sirrah, come hither.
'Tis no time to jest, and feignyour manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here,to save my life,
puts my apparel and mycountenance on,
for in a quarrel since Icame ashore,
I kill'd a man and fear Iwas descried.
Wait you on him, I chargeyou, as becomes,
while I make way fromhence to save my life.
You understand me?
I, sir? Ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio inyour mouth.
Tranio is changed intoLucentio.
Yeah, the better for him.
Would I were so too.
So could I, faith, boy, tohave the next wish after,
that Lucentio indeed hadBaptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for mysake but your master's,
I advise you use yourmanners discreetly in allkind of companies.
When I am alone, why, thenI am Tranio;
but in all places else,your master Lucentio.
Tranio, let's go.
One thing more rests thatthyself execute--
to make one among thesewooers--
if thou ask me why,sufficeth,
my reasons are both goodand weighty.
Verona, for a while, Itake my leave,
to see my friends inPadua,
but of all--
oh--
my best beloved andapproved friend, Hortensio;
and I trow this is hishouse.
Here, sirrah Grumio,knock, I say.
Knock, sir?
Whom should I knock?
Is there any man hasabused your worship?
Villain, I say, knock mehere soundly.
Knock you here, sir?
Why, what am I, sir, that Ishould knock you here, sir?
Villain, I say, knock meat this gate
and rap me well, or I'llknock your knave's pate.
My master is grownquarrelsome.
I should knock you first,
then I know after whocomes by the worst.
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah,
an you'll not knock, I'llring it.
I'll try how you can sol,fa, and sing it.
Help, masters, help! Mymaster is mad!
Now, knock when I bid you,sirrah villain!
How now, what's thematter?
My old friend Grumio...
And my good friendPetruchio!
How do you all at Verona?
Signior Hortensio, comeyou to part the fray?
"Con tutto il cuore, bentrovato," may I say.
Ooh, um, "Alla nostra casaben venuto,
molto honorato signor mioPetruchio."
Rise, Grumio, rise.
Up, up, up, up.
We will compound thisquarrel.
Nay, sir, 'tis no matter,what he 'leges in Latin.
If this be not a lawful causefor me to leave his service,
look you, sir, he bid meknock him and rap himsoundly, sir.
Well, was it fit for aservant to use his master so,
being perhaps, for aught Isee, 2 and 30, a pip out,
whom to God I had wellknock'd at first,
then had not Grumio comeby the worst?
A senseless villain.
Good Hortensio, I bade therascal knock upon yourgate
and could not get him formy heart to do it.
Knock at the gate? Oheavens, spake you notthese words plain,
"Sirrah, knock me here, rapme here, knock me well,
knock me soundly"?
And come you now with,"Knock at the gate"?
Sirrah, be gone, or talknot, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience; I amGrumio's pledge.
Why, this's a heavy chance'twixt him and you,
your ancient, pleasant,trusty servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweetfriend,
what happy gale blows you toPadua here from old Verona?
Oh, such wind as scattersyoung men through the world
to seek their fortunefarther than at home
where small experiencegrows.
But in a few, SigniorHortensio, thus it standswith me.
Antonio, my father, isdeceased,
Oh.
And I have thrust myselfinto this maze,
haply to wive and thriveas best I may.
Crowns in my purse I haveand goods at home,
and so am come abroad tosee the world.
Petruchio, shall I thencome roundly to thee
and wish thee to a shrewdill-favor'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but alittle for my counsel,
and yet I promise you, sheshall be rich, and very rich.
Yet thou'rt too much myfriend,
and I'll not wish thee toher.
Signior Hortensio, 'twixtsuch friends as we,
few words suffice;
and therefore, if thouknow one rich enough
to be Petruchio's wife,
as wealth is burden of mywooing dance,
be she as foul as wasFlorentius' love,
as old as Sibyl,
and as cursed and shrewdas Socrates' Xanthippe--
or a worse-- she moves menot,
or not removes, at least,affection's edge in me,
were she as rough as arethe Adriatic seas:
I come to wive itwealthily in Padua.
If wealthily, then happilyin Padua.
Nay, look you, sir, hetells you flatly what hismind is.
Why, give him gold enough,marry him to a puppet oran aglet-baby
or an old trot with ne'era tooth in her head,
though she have as manydiseases as 2 and 50 horses,
nothing comes amiss somoney comes withal.
But, Petruchio, since weare stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that Ibroach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, helpthee to a wife
with wealth enough andyoung and beauteous,
brought up as best becomesa gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and thatis faults enough,
is that she is intolerablecursed and shrewd andfroward,
so beyond all measurethat,
were my state far worserthan it is,
I would not wed her for amine of gold.
Hortensio, peace.
Thou know'st not gold'seffect.
Tell me her father's name,and 'tis enough,
for I will board her,
though she chide as loudas thunder when the cloudsin autumn crack.
Her father is BaptistaMinola, an affable andcourteous gentleman.
Her name is KatharinaMinola,
renown'd in Padua for herscolding tongue.
I know her father, thoughI know not her.
He knew my deceased fatherwell.
I will not sleep,Hortensio, till I see her;
and therefore, let me bethus bold with you
to give you over at thisfirst encounter,
unless you will accompanyme thither.
I pray you, sir, let himgo while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knewhim as well as I do,
she would think scolding woulddo little good upon him.
She may perhaps call himhalf a score knaves or so.
That's nothing, an hebegin once, he'll rail inhis rope tricks.
I'll tell you what sir, anshe stand him but alittle,
he'll throw a figure inher face, so disfigure herwith it,
she shall have no more eyesto see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.
Tarry, Petruchio, I mustgo with thee,
for in Baptista's keep, mytreasure is.
He hath the jewel of mylife in hold--
his youngest daughter,beautiful Bianca--
and her withholds from meand other more,
suitors to her and rivalsin my love,
supposing it a thingimpossible
for those defects I havebefore rehearsed
that ever Katharina shallbe woo'd.
Therefore, this order hathBaptista ta'en
that none shall haveaccess unto Bianca
till Katharine the cursedhave got a husband.
Katharine the cursed, atitle for a maid, of alltitles the worst.
Now shall my friendPetruchio do me grace
and offer me disguised insober robes
to old Baptista as aschoolmaster
well seen in music toinstruct Bianca
that so I may by thisdevice
at least have leave andleisure to make love to her
and, unsuspected, courther by herself.
Here's no knavery.
See, to beguile the oldfolks,
how the young folks laytheir heads together.
Master, master, look aboutyou. Who goes there, ha?
Oh, oh, peace, Grumio.
It is the rival of mylove.
Petruchio, stand by awhile.
O, very well.
I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir,
I'll have them very fairlybound:
all books of love, seethat at any hand;
and see you read no otherlectures to her,
you understand me.
Over and beside SigniorBaptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with alargess.
Take your paper too,
and let me have them verywell perfumed,
for she is sweeter thanperfume itself
to whom they go to.
Mm.
Nay, what will you read toher?
Whate'er I read to her,I'll plead for you
as for my patron, standyou so assured,
as firmly as yourself werestill in place.
Yea, and perhaps with moresuccessful words than you--
Hmm?
Unless you were a scholar,sir.
O this learning, what athing it is.
O this woodcock, what anass it is.
Grumio, mum.
God save you, SigniorGremio.
And you are well met,Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I amgoing?
To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquirecarefully
about a schoolmaster forthe fair Bianca,
and by good fortune,
I have lighted well onthis young man,
for learning and behaviorfit for her turn,
well read in poetry andother books, good ones, Iwarrant ye.
'Tis well; and I have meta gentleman
hath promised me to showme to another,
a fine musician toinstruct our mistress;
so shall I no whit be behindin duty to fair Bianca,
so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that mydeeds shall prove.
And that his bags shallprove.
Gremio, 'tis now no timeto vent our love.
Listen to me, and if youspeak me fair,
I'll tell you newsindifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman bychance I met,
upon agreement from us tohis liking,
will undertake to woocursed Katharine.
Huh?
Yea, and to marry her
if her dowry please.
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you toldhim all her faults?
I know she is an irksome,brawling scold.
If that be all, masters, Ihear no harm.
No, say'st me so, friend?
What countryman?
Born in Verona, oldAntonio's son.
My father dead--
Oh.
my fortune lives for me,
and I do hope good daysand long to see.
O sir, such a life, withsuch a wife, were strange,
but if you have a stomach,to't i' God's name.
You shall have meassisting you in all.
But will you woo thiswildcat?
Will I live?
Will he woo her? Aye, orI'll hang her.
Why came I hither but tothat intent?
Think you a little din candaunt mine ears?
Have I not in my timeheard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea,puff'd up with winds,
rage like an angry boarchafed with sweat?
Have I not heard greatordnance in the field,
and heaven's artillerythunder in the skies?
Have I not, in a pitchedbattle, heard
loud 'larums, neighingsteeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of awoman's tongue
that gives not half sogreat a blow to hear
as will a chestnut in afarmer's fire?
Tush, tush. Fear boys withbugs.
For he fears none.
Hortensio, hark,
this gentleman is happilyarrived,
my mind presumes, for hisown good and ours.
Mm, I promised we would becontributors
and bear his charge ofwooing, whatsoe'er.
And so we will, providedthat he win her.
I would I were as sure ofa good dinner.
Gentlemen, God save you.
If I may be bold, tell me,I beseech you,
which is the readiest way
to the house of SigniorBaptista Minola?
He that has the two fairdaughters?
Is't he you mean?
Even he, Biondello.
Hark you, sir, you meannot her to--
Perhaps, him and her, sir.
What have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir,at any hand, I pray.
I love no chiders, sir.
Biondello, let's away.
Well begun, Tranio.
Sir, a word ere you go.
Are you a suitor to themaid you talk of,
yea or no?
And if I be, sir, is itany offence?
No, if without more wordsyou will get you hence.
Why, sir, I pray, are notthe streets as free
for me as for you?
But so is not she.
For what reason, I beseechyou?
For this reason, if you'llknow,
that she's the choice loveof Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen ofSignior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters.
If you be gentlemen, do methis right.
Hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noblegentleman
to whom my father is notall unknown,
and were his daughterfairer than she is,
she may more suitors haveand me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had athousand wooers.
Then well one more mayfair Bianca have,
and so she shall.
Lucentio shall make one,
though Paris came in hopeto speed alone.
What, this gentleman willout-talk us all.
Sir, give him head.
I know he'll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end areall these words?
Sir, let me be so bold asask you,
did you yet ever seeBaptista's daughter?
No, sir, but hear I dothat he hath two,
the one as famous for ascolding tongue
as is the other forbeauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's forme.
Let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor togreat Hercules,
and let it be more thanAlcides' 12.
Sir, understand you thisof me in sooth.
The youngest daughter,whom you hearken for,
her father keeps from allaccess of suitors
and will not promise herto any man
until the elder sisterfirst be wed.
The younger then is freeand not before.
If it be so, sir,
that you are the man muststead us all--
and me amongst the rest--
and if you break the iceand do this feat,
achieve the elder,
and set the younger freefor our access,
whose hap shall be to haveher
will not so graceless beto be ingrate.
Sir, you say well, andwell you do conceive,
and since you do professto be a suitor,
you must, as we do,gratify this gentleman
to whom we all--all restgenerally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack.
In sign whereof,
please you we may contrivethis afternoon
and quaff carouses to ourmistress' health
and do as adversaries doin law--
strive mightily but eatand drink as friends.
Excellent motion.
Let's be gone.
The motion's good indeed,and be it so.
Petruchio, I shall be yourben venuto.